Good afternoon, good evening,
good morning, everybody.
This is Peter Joseph, and welcome
to Revolution Now! episode 59.
It has been a long minute once again. I
apologize for that. But things have been
very productive behind the scenes over the
last two months, I suppose. And I really do
mean it when I say I want to get these podcasts
happening on a more periodic and frequent basis.
And it will happen. It will happen. I want it
to happen because I don’t like this big gap,
lack of continuity, but I can only do so
much at this particular point in time.
So Integral development infrastructure has had
some really good strides since the last podcast.
The website is now up. It needs a little cleanup
as usual, but I think it works fine as it is.
It includes some good intro info with
some walkthrough simulations of the five
systems as they’re currently presented
with their modules. There’s an FAQ,
which will be greatly expanded over time. I
think that’s going to be an important component.
As far as the style of the website, I went
with a kind of minimal retro style to support
a programming theme. But if you don’t like
that hacker aesthetic, then there’s a button
in the top right-hand corner that switches to
a clean, more standard look. I still have some
CSS work to do on all of this, but it’s readable
enough. And if anyone finds an overt problem with
formatting on mobile, or a typo, or whatever,
just use the email contact form on the site.
Now beyond that, people can also download the
white paper and the new developer’s guide,
which I don’t think I announced last
time this podcast aired. And of course,
all of that and more is integrated into GitHub
and Discord, both of which have been set up with
the initial structure that includes all
such documents and preparation for more.
The critical review of all this is what phase
one, so to speak, is going to be. As of right now,
if you’re GitHub-savvy, you can fork those
repositories and take a look at them on
your own time. But the infrastructure for
Discord and GitHub is currently view-only.
It’s just there to have a placeholder
while applications come in to gain access,
which one can find at the
community page on the website.
It’s a very simple, straightforward series of
questions just to see where people are as a
kind of filter. How serious they
are to even fill this thing out,
etc. Strengths and weaknesses can be assessed,
along with some critical review that I’ve
already been very appreciative of, as per
the questions where people can describe their
current perception of the project in its crude
form. And again, that’s been very informative.
I do want to point out that the development
ecosystem we’re trying to set forward is not
for just passive interest. What
we’re trying to do right now is
build a working group of people
that are inspired by the project,
that have a critical analysis of it, that
have an actual positive intent to want to
see something like this come to life. That’s
really the only fundamental requirement.
No one has to be a hardcore developer or have
some fancy degree, even though expertise is
going to be important on a certain level at
certain points. All kinds of thinking matter
here in the context of essentially creative
problem-solving. One never knows where that one
spark will come from when we’re trying to build
something of this nature, or any kind of project.
In fact, very often the most educated or
institutionally regarded people are actually
locked into a frame of reference that can be
ineffective. It’s that conditioning of academia,
as we’ve talked about in other podcasts.
And then someone comes along from a very
different unorthodox background,
and they’re the ones that actually
make the breakthrough because they
can see it from a different angle.
So that said, we need people that
are positive, thoughtful, patient,
and realistic to form a foundational group, and
it’s going to be challenging to attempt this in
an all-volunteer aggregated way. As talked
about in the white paper, it might not work,
which means another route will have to be taken,
but we’ll consider that when we get there.
Now as far as the broad strokes of this phase
one, as a general marker noted on the website
and in the developer’s guide, this is about broad
initial planning, figuring out what we’re going
to do and how to do it. Questions such as: are
the modules and principles behind them truly
workable? Is there a certain function that is
completely and utterly technically unfeasible?
So the white paper is a starting point, and the
developer’s guide gives a starting strategy,
but it all needs to be thoroughly
evaluated before anything is built,
needless to say. And once we figure all that out,
we move on to phase two, which is the build. But
I emphasize that phase one is absolutely
critical. There’s so much to go through,
and we’ll be continuing to talk about all of that
through these podcasts, my Substack articles,
and of course when meetings start to commence
and people begin engaging in Discord and GitHub.
Now what is actually approached in phase two,
which again will be figured out, but here’s my
suggestion as per the developer’s guide: there’s a
minimum viable system architecture that’s been put
forward. I think you start small and increase
complexity, vertical slicing I believe they
call it. How you come to terms with what to keep
and what to pause is, of course, up for debate.
I would also add that the CDS, which we’re going
to talk about a great deal today, could be an
important initial focus in all of this because
it can be used in the actual build of Integral
itself. But until that time, we’ll structure out
something through Discord in terms of coming to
a general consensus of things, moving that into
GitHub and then pull requests. Blocking objections
and other elements of that general method will
be put forward for those that are familiar.
Then we have phase three. Phase three is testing
and simulation. Whatever is built in phase two,
we have to test it. And fortunately, there
are a lot of advanced ways to do this now,
testing segments of the system and testing
the system as a whole, agent-based modeling
and things like that, before we move into phase
four, which would be real-world application.
I also suggest that one bridge from
phase three to phase four—well,
phase three will focus more on
automated testing of segments.
Phase four can be led into by a virtual
node established by the online community.
So if we have 50 developers that are doing this,
we have all of us come together to be a virtual
node and we run a full node simulation, come up
with different scenarios, different problems.
Say we’re going to build a vertical farm. We
run through all five systems. We introduce
as many problems as we can think of, etc., etc.,
etc., including the legal and regulatory issues,
which I’m going to talk about a little
bit here in a second. So I think it’s
fairly straightforward how that kind
of exercise could be constructed.
And then you run multiple scenarios. You come up
with a mesh network, cell phone construction. You
come up with an Uber-style shared transportation
system. You come up with a project development
simulated for a micro solar panel array. Remember,
the initial steps of this kind of mutual aid-based
approach, which is very deliberate, is to get the
foundation of how we live down in a minimal form.
We’re not going to run out there with
Integral and try to build something
luxury. That’s against the point
of the entire thing, because at the
core of Integral is this minimalism I talked
about before. At least as an initial state,
we want people to get off the grid
of the current system – they have to.
So I don’t want to go on that tangent,
but in the simulations we put forward,
those should be the focus points. The most
core things where someone can get up one day,
go through their entire day, utilizing the system,
and they don’t have to spend a dollar. They’re
not engaging the market. They are off the grid.
So anyway, you set up those scenarios,
you run the virtual node simulations,
various constraints and problems are
introduced, etc., etc. And then we
have phase four, with the actual physical
implementation of a minimum software suite,
most likely. The proto-nodes are focusing on
these core survival elements I just mentioned.
I say this because this could happen
fairly quickly in this measured,
scaled simplicity-to-complexity method if it’s
designed strategically. There’s a lot of inherent
complexity to all this stuff. The assumption
of Integral, which separates it in part,
is the fact that it recognizes the need to move
away from these small social reciprocity systems
that existed for literally hundreds of years
in slight antagonism to general competitive
market trade behavior and expand them so they can
actually work on a truly advanced modern scale.
And of course, the proto-nodes themselves could
probably engage in their own simulations to start.
That could be part of it, where the proto-nodes
get their actual physical people together,
they look at their resources, the
landscape of their actual ecosystem,
and they begin to run simulations that are
kind of built into the system, in fact.
And I’ll say one more thing in terms of
phases, even though this is way down the line,
but it’s worth noting since we’re doing
the holistic context here, that broader
network development will eventually
emerge, where internodal coordination,
application of coordination envelopes
as they’re described in the white paper,
methods for internodal problem solving,
resource sharing, problem-solution coordination,
other forms of distributed coordination across
the network—that has to be introduced, tested,
and so forth as well. It can’t
just be ignored at this time.
So ultimately, a proto-node is just
not connected to anything yet. They
have to be connected to be a true node, just by
definition. And again, that’s way down the line,
but it’s something that we have to think
about in this sort of holistic approach.
In fact, I want to say something about the
legality and regulatory environment quickly,
because I’ve gotten a lot of emails
on this. This must be taken seriously
and into account as a general constraint
for any potential node. Integral nodes,
if they emerge, are going to be alien entities
within a vicious legacy economy. And that has
to be just as important a consideration
as how the five systems flow in general.
Tax situations, legal status, interface mechanism
attributes—meaning things that are engaged in a
legacy market economy for resource acquisition,
as talked about before. Questions such as: should
a node be a nonprofit? This is country-specific
as well. And the thing is, it might in fact—the
more we learn about this kind of general
restriction, even though it’s fluid to a degree:
it might change the structure of the way Integral
is actually built, we might have to alter the ITC
dynamics in fact to conform, or at least try to
anticipate a less tense environment if something
strange happens, like some kind of structure
like this is actually in violation of tax law.
It’s unfortunate to think that way because you’re
basically having to reduce the system’s design to
fit an inefficient environment, but that’s life.
Which is partly why I commented in the past that
the United States might not be the ideal setting
for mature Integral nodes to grow and advance,
not only because of the potential tax issues,
but also because of the cultural state of the US,
which maybe I’m wrong, but seems to embrace a
far more selfish and competitive character on
average than we see in other countries. The rise
of Donald Trump kind of speaks to that, I suspect.
But even in the United States, with all of
its inherent limitations as it exists from
a legal tax standpoint, Integral still
fits quite well as it is in the profile
of a mutual aid construct focused on social
reciprocity. The core supporting precedent
for this are the existing time banks that
have been around for many, many decades.
If you look at TimeBanks USA or TimeBanks.org,
they do not operate in a tax capacity or as a
formal economic institution. They’ve gotten
away with it. The founder of TimeBanks.org
was Edgar Cahn, who was an attorney
and legal scholar, a brilliant guy,
and he spent a great deal of time researching
this reality as he developed TimeBanks.org.
And I actually have him, by the way, in an opening
section in my new film. I found his work to be
very influential because he pushed the limit
and he understood why, even though it doesn’t go
quite far enough. He literally approached the US
government and the IRS and was able to reach the
conclusion with them that time bank exchanges are
in fact not taxable because they’re mutual aid,
which is a category. They’re not commercial
exchange. Credits are non-transferable. There’s
no market valuation occurring—you could argue
that, but there isn’t, not in the structure.
And there is no profit intent and there’s no
conversion to cash, which is precisely the
condition of Integral, even though it’s a bit
more granular in what Integral is trying to do.
But all that said, there is good precedent
in support of the foundation of Integral
from a legal and tax basis. Now,
that doesn’t mean things can’t
change or accusations assumed if the
network grows to a point of starting
to affect the legacy market economy. This
is to be expected in terms of pushback.
Anyway, all of that said, something to keep in
mind. These are important things to anticipate,
but I’m optimistic that this isn’t
going to be a big issue anytime soon,
especially with the scaled incremental
nature of the development. But again,
we’ve got so much work to do before
we can even get to that point.
Okay, let’s shift gears here now and talk
about democratic decision-making in the
truest sense of the idea. We talked
a bit about this in the last podcast,
but we’re going to go into more granular detail in
terms of actual approaches as we get into the CDS.
The first thing I want to cover,
which I find fascinating, is Stafford
Beer’s Syntegrity. It’s a high-bandwidth,
small-group decision-making method he developed
in the late 1970s. In the Integral white paper,
this method is proposed as a kind of last-ditch
effort to find consensus in an interpersonal way
once consensus attempts in module six—which
we’re going to talk about in a moment—fail.
Module six in the CDS pipeline is that module
that attempts to reach final consensus on the
given issue or set of scenarios. Module six is
not just like some vote. It’s an assessment of
preferences and objections, again, as we’ll
talk about. And if that consensus fails,
one option is to jump to module nine, which
is an auxiliary module that attempts to do
more manual fleshing out of the problem,
which includes utilizing Syntegrity.
So what is Syntegrity? I’m not going to
go into every little detail about it,
but I do recommend a paper by
Beer’s former partner—in fact,
Elena Leonard—called Team Syntegrity: A New
Method for Group Work, which was written in 1996,
even though there’s been good documentation
since then with people utilizing this method.
In short, Beer did something quite interesting
as an inspiration, which is take the geometric
surface of the icosahedron, which is a 20-sided
polyhedron. What I’m holding in my hand is an
18-sided polyhedron, or octadecahedron,
but you get the idea of the shape. What
is it? It is a network structure. It is not
hierarchical. There’s no top, there’s no bottom.
And Stafford Beer bases the communication
structure of group interaction in Syntegrity
on this kind of networked element of
the icosahedron with 20 surfaces. And
uncoincidentally, this is also the structure
Buckminster Fuller put forward in his famous
geodesic dome and the Dymaxion world map, where
he imposes the entire world on these surfaces.
The icosahedron has 20 surfaces but 30 edges, and
Beer maps each edge to a participant. Hence 30 is
traditionally the number involved.
That’s how many people go into it
to make a decision, but it can be scaled, and this
has happened with smaller and larger groups based
on the multiplied geometry of the surface
of this, which has its own constraints.
And there has been consideration of expansion
to more people because that’s essentially
the problem. If it’s only 30 people, or
slight variance therein, it doesn’t help
for large-scale decision-making. But it has been
pitched—I believe Beer talked about this as well,
even though I don’t know any evidence
of it happening—that you could have,
say, 300 people, divide it into 10 groups of
30, and basically have the sessions unfold,
and then agents from each of the 30 move up and
then the session repeats again in a recursive way.
But as far as the basic process of the 30 people,
which are the edges represented in the polyhedron,
the vertices represent topics of interest,
meaning that there’s an angle taken to the
value of what’s being proposed and they’re
arguing in this symmetry. And everyone is
broken into teams in this way. Again, I’m not
going to go through the complete nuance of it.
But let’s understand the cybernetic principle
here, which is variety management once again,
accounting for the diverse opinions of
people rather than merely collapsing it
down into some raw vote like you do
in traditional democracy. Basically,
what Beer put forward was a kind of manual
human algorithm, which has proven quite
successful in almost every single case I
read about, which is why I included it.
If you have a small group of people and
they just are having a really hard time,
there is a value judgment problem, things
that really need to be fleshed out on a
personal level, as tedious as it
is, this is one kind of fallback.
Now, this begs the modern question though: can
it actually be expanded through programming?
Can you use modern automation tools and
calculation and maybe even AI to streamline
what was ultimately a very high-bandwidth
personal, face-to-face, and slow process?
And in the 1990s, there was some kind of
partial software development application,
but I don’t think it was embracing the entire
system, if I remember correctly. And I kind of
looked around for quite a while to see if
I could find anyone that had really tried
to digitize this process, but I haven’t seen it
yet. If anyone finds that, please send it to me.
So back to module nine of the CDS, which again
we’re going to talk about. I threw this in there,
so to speak, because I think it harnesses
the true sense of community through a very
intelligent strategy as put forward by Beer.
Will it be useful if it can’t be scaled? I
don’t know, but these are things to
explore, which is why it’s there.
But what separates the CDS of Integral—what
it’s attempting to do—is embrace the full
journey as we can conceive of it, from
raw input, critical data analysis and
constraints surrounding an issue, to
structured understanding, to decision,
to execution, and then back to revision
through feedback as a review process.
The CDS starts from the premise
that decision-making is a
sequence of transformations. Something is
noticed, then defined, then understood,
evaluated and discussed, then decided and
acted upon, and then reviewed once again.
That’s the cycle. And if any of those steps
are weak or fragmented, the outcome degrades.
And remember, the Integral CDS isn’t just
general policy decision-creating or something.
This is about tangible stuff in the end
as a foundationally economic system,
even though the CDS can apply in
theory to any kind of decision-making.
So that said, what I’m going to do now
is go through all this module by module,
explaining the principles and processes behind it,
and also pointing out the caveats and gaps in the
existing white paper, to which there are many.
So first let’s do an overview of
the entire thing module by module,
and then we’ll go through it
again with further details.
Module one is intake. A problem of concern
or proposal is input into the system,
which validates the source, timestamps it, removes
any duplicates, and packages it for module two.
The inputs coming into module one do not just come
from people as well. They also come when necessary
from the other four systems of Integral when
those systems trigger alerts to a given problem.
Module two then takes this flow of information
and structures it using argument mapping
and semantic clustering, outputting a data
object from then to module three to process.
Module three is a data retrieval process that
takes in the structured data from module two
and retrieves relevant information from the
other four systems. For example, if the issue
is a broken machine, module three searches out
relevant data surrounding that machine from its
acquisition to its history, to its repairs,
to its general context of use, and so forth,
extracted again generally
from the other four systems.
Is it completely exhaustive? No, of course not.
It depends on what the circumstance is. If the
issue clearly requires deeper investigation
in general away from the other four systems,
then that can be queued in, so to speak,
and when module five rolls around, people
will understand that there’s other information
they may need to extract from external sources.
So module three is about finding the
context of the problem or the proposal.
Module four extends this kind of
retrieval process into constraints:
norms, and constraint checking. What is a
constraint? It is something that has to be
abided by as a rule. This pertains primarily
to proposals rather than assessing problems,
even though problem resolution, as said
before, does inevitably involve proposals.
It’s important to point out that constraints
are perhaps the most critical aspect of the
guiding methodology of Integral in totality.
It’s what’s missing in the world today in
any intelligent strategic understanding.
Constraints are not inhibitions. Rather,
they constitute the path of proper
responsible action to do things right.
I’m not going to talk about the OAD,
the Open Access Design system, today,
but it’s worth pointing out that it
is also deeply rooted in this kind of
constraint-mapped logic, rooted fundamentally
in environmental and sustainability concerns.
That said, the CDS module for constraints
are retrieved from the other four systems,
rooted in relevant metrics, while also
referencing any constitutional constraints
or constitutional rules that the node sets
up for themselves. So like module three,
which is taking in relevant context
information, module four is pulling
in constraint data. And all this is going
to be very, very helpful when the humans
come together in module five for debate and
conversation, being as informed as they can be.
However, there is a difference. Unlike module
three, which is context-data retrieval, module
four actually does make judgments and comparisons
against whatever information is in the proposals.
Moving on, it’s important to point out—and this
is a little vague in the white paper—there is
a bridge step between module three and module
four, which is the auto-generation of proposals.
In other words, a set of proposals that are
automatically generated and added to the
pipeline to be processed like all other proposals
at that stage by module four through constraints.
Module one doesn’t just take in general
proposals, it takes in problems to be
resolved. And the module three bridge to
module four is looking at those problems,
looking at the environment, and saying,
“Okay, we’re going to infer a few things
here to get the ball rolling into
module four for constraint analysis.”
So then we have module five. This is the
grand participatory deliberation workspace.
Everything up until this point has been
automated since submission, and the community
has been notified that there are proposals and
problems that need resolution in their node.
And in module five there are a range of tools,
as discussed prior, such as objection
mapping, preference gradient expression,
and others that are incorporated to help try
and figure out what to do and find consensus.
The team now has collected data from module three
regarding the issue in question, the context,
along with relevant constraints as they apply
to proposals that need to abide by them.
In module five, participants can
look through all this. They can
propose new solutions. They refine
auto-generated ones or initial ones,
etc. How the actual human engagement process works
in module five is not specified in the paper. But
a structured workflow is going to be extremely
important, which needs to be figured out.
That said, what comes out of module
five generally are two things:
a final objection map and a preference gradient
for each given proposal for consideration,
which are aggregated from the final conclusions
of all the participants upon the decision
at some point to move to module six for this
processing of scenarios, as it would be called.
Now regarding module six, this is referred
to as the weighted consensus module,
and it calculates the objection map and the
preference gradients created in module five.
And it arrives at one of three conclusions. It
can approve a scenario or multiple scenarios,
which we’ll touch upon a little bit
later. It can push back scenarios
to module five for revision, or it
can escalate things to module nine,
which once again is the more hands-on approach
that includes Syntegrity as a last resort.
And for the sake of this very brief overview,
we’re going to assume it has been approved,
which moves things into module seven,
which records and versions the decision.
It documents in the metadata everything
that happened to get there for the sake
of record and transparency, which then leads
to module eight, which is the dispatch of the
decision to the relevant areas of the system,
setting the decision in motion, in other words.
And generally speaking, module eight is kind of
the end of the core process, with again module
nine being the backup for consensus, while
module 10 is the decision review procedure
that may happen weeks or months down the line. It
depends on how things are actually working out.
So that’s the overview.
And it begs a question about monitoring the
efficacy of these decisions within the system,
right? And that should be understood
as being distributed. In other words,
the way the system watches itself is
primarily through the feedback review system,
the fifth system, the FRS, which is
more of a total awareness system for
the health of the node. It doesn’t
take in every single tiny metric,
even though one could argue it could in a small
node, but its purpose is to have a holistic sense.
But the other four systems maintain their own
internal monitoring, with the exception of the
CDS. The CDS doesn’t actually monitor;
it responds to the other three systems,
I should say. So the OAD, the COS, and
the ITC system are all utilizing their
own internal monitoring structure
as dictated in the white paper,
with some of that data aggregated and moved
towards the FRS for a more holistic picture.
So in other words, if something comes up that
needs to go to module one of the CDS as an alert
from another system, this is where it’s coming
from, either from the FRS as a holistic monitor,
or from the other three systems that have
their own monitoring structure within them.
So that said, that’s the pipeline in a nutshell.
Now we go through it all again in finer detail,
as there’s a lot of nuance and
clarifications that need to be made.
Back to module one, issue capture and
signal intake. As stated, there are two
input sources. First is person-introduced. Second
is system-generated alerts, as just touched upon.
Now that said, with regard to human proposals
or observations of problems or issues,
we have the issue of scope. What kinds
of problems or proposals should count
as a node-level concern as we are
describing it? Should everyone that
sees anything wrong or has any general
project whim just instantly go to the
node’s CDS interface and express themselves
regardless of the scale of the application?
In a very small node or a proto-node, that
distinction may indeed barely matter because
everything exists on the same operational level
with just a few co-ops and whatnot. But in a more
developed node with hundreds or maybe thousands of
people working across many different cooperatives,
it would be too nonsensical for every small issue
to be evaluated on the total node-level CDS.
And this points to something not quite
clarified in the current documentation,
even though it is implied. The co-ops within
an Integral node are recursively decentralized,
just like the node itself is in the network,
regional network, as a whole. In other words,
just as a node would function as a self-governing
unit within the broader Integral network, assuming
multiple nodes, each cooperative functions as
a smaller decision unit within the node itself.
In other words, co-ops are sub-nodes within the
regional node. So in a well-established dynamic
community, it becomes impractical for an entire
node population to address every minor issue that
arises. If there’s a simple lighting malfunction
in some co-op building, there’s no reason to
elevate that to the total node community because
it can be resolved on that level. If 20 people are
in a vertical farm system and something’s going
wrong, the team assigned to that system will take
on the burden of that initially and decide if
it needs to be escalated to a node-level CDS.
This is all common sense, but it’s worth
pointing out. It is only when a problem
that needs resolution or proposal expands
the scope of that co-op that it becomes
a node-level concern. And that usually means
consequences overflowing beyond the local co-op,
beginning to affect other cooperatives or
something in the environment, etc., etc.
Which then begs yet another question: if there’s
20 people in a co-op dealing with a problem or a
proposal, how do they actually reach consensus?
Well, as per the consistent idea of recursive
self-similarity in a cybernetic sense,
the answer is that they have their own
scaled-down CDS system as well. This could be an
adaptation of the existing node CDS. It could be
a submodule of it. There are lots of ways to
approach it, but it’s the idea that matters.
Again, that core cybernetic principle
of recursion that creates multi-scale
cohesion while preserving decentralization
and autonomy, which is critical and rational.
And what happens if that decision has
adverse effects they didn’t see? Well,
then that becomes a consequence of that, and
then it gets elevated to a CDS node concern.
In the exact same way that the nodes in
the network, if there is an overlapping
regional node issue or proposal, that gets
escalated through coordination envelopes as
per the white paper. This kind of scaling to
resolve a problem and a reduction of it – this
is a variation of the idea, which enables a
form of large-scale multi-node collaboration
without overt hierarchy being established at
the same time, again as per the white paper.
Okay, back on point. So module one on the common
community level again takes in human signals,
from reacting to a problem
to proposing new projects,
while also potentially getting problem
alerts from the other four systems,
primarily most likely the FRS, since again,
its job is to monitor overall node health.
Such alerts can have a vast range of
reasons, and it’s best to think of it in
terms of logistical alerts that are common
today with, say, factory distribution. If
an Amazon distribution center runs
low on some kind of inventory,
they have an automated system naturally
to alert, and correction is set in motion.
So this is basic stuff, but it is an
important nuance to talk about structure,
as the system is only as intelligent as the way
it can communicate, especially when it comes to
these automated data flows. And same for the input
structure for humans submitting in module one.
As noted, and as we’ll get to more so, module
two is what has to deal with sorting what has
been submitted in module one, and it can come from
multiple overlapping simultaneous sources. Again,
the assumption of complexity is consistent here.
So the stronger and more organized the inputs,
naturally, the better. Again, this is common
sense, but just imagine a kind of structured
submission form that very thoughtfully thinks
about the variables in question in terms of the
overall submission, not specific submission, but
just what needs to be known as a general template.
Now, with respect to module one and
the supportive data I mentioned,
the submission of schematics or
photographs or reports regarding problems,
these carry over to module three. They’re not
processed by module two. It’s a pass-through.
Now, it’s worth considering that large language
models these days can dramatically assist module
three as part of its structure. So
you have evidence and documentation,
various formats and whatnot. This is much easier
to digest these days than it used to be. So it’s
something to keep in mind and may very well assist
this structured complexity I’m referring to in the
context of submitted evidence and data on module
one, to be interpreted and collected once again
in context for module three. I
just want to throw that out there.
That said, module one, it’s all about validating
authenticity, removing duplicates, and ensuring
the intake is sound, adding a timestamp to the
record. So let’s imagine a scenario where some
problem has made itself present, and many people
have experienced it, and they’ve all flocked to
the CDS within an hour or two to report it
multiple times. Module one is designed to
deal with that multiplicity of duplication,
multiple submissions of the same thing.
So when a submission arrives, module one
converts its text into an embedding, technically,
a numerical representation of the submission’s
meaning. This allows two or more entries that
say the same thing in a different language, such
as phrasing “the bridge floods during storms” or
“heavy rain is covering the bridge walkway.”
These could be recognized as equivalent, while
entries that only sound similar on the surface
but mean different things can stay distinct.
So module one compares that embedding against
every existing submission on the same issue using
cosine similarity. Again, this is in the white
paper, which produces a score between 0 and 1,
where 1 means essentially identical, and 0 means
completely unrelated. If the highest score exceeds
a preset threshold, which I won’t go into, the new
submission is flagged as a duplicate and absorbed.
And note, duplicates are not just thrown
away. The original submission is indeed kept
as a canonical entry, if you will, and the
duplicate is recorded as a linked reference
pointing back to it with the duplicate’s
author, timestamp, and other metadata.
So that is essentially the entire job of module
one: clean, attributable, non-duplicate input
ready to be handed to module two for thematic
organization, which brings us to module two.
So module two takes this authenticated,
time-stamped, and deduplicated input
from module one and begins organizing it for
easier comprehension. Now in an active node,
multiple people may raise individual concerns,
observations, or even proposals that
actually touch upon the same underlying
problem from multiple angles. I don’t
mean a singular problem, but a set of
related problems. And module two is here to
figure that kind of thing out automatically.
Naturally, if you imagine someone’s
reporting multiple problems in a given co-op,
that context will be stated quite explicitly.
And so they would be clustered in that way,
be condensed in that way, if obvious
enough, easy to figure out, easy for
the system to see that. But if there’s
a relationship there that isn’t seen
or explicitly denoted by the people that are
submitting, module two ideally gets this done.
So where module one handles duplicate
submissions, catching near-identical
entries through similarity matching, module
two handles related submissions, grouping
them into coherent themes so the deliberation
space becomes navigable rather than just this
flat list of individual entries where people
have to figure out the associations themselves.
Now more technically, as stated, module two uses
semantic clustering and a framing logic to group
these related submissions, and it happens in
four types: proposals, objections, comments,
and system signals. Once again, just to
be thorough here, evidence submissions
from module one are not counted here. They are
indexed and later addressed in module three.
So overall, module two identifies themes, reveals
overlaps and even conflicts, and delineates the
underlying structure of a given issue, a proposal,
or a problem. Again, it all assumes a stream of
messy observations, concerns, and so forth. And
in an active node, there could be dozens of inputs
into module one per day coming from many different
directions with many different intentions.
Now in the code, module two’s output is
a structured issue-view pipeline object,
one per issue, which passes to module
three for contextual assessment.
So let’s move on to module three,
knowledge integration context engine.
Module three’s primary organizational
input is this structured issue view that
module two produces, which contains organized
information about the issue in four main parts.
First, there is the issue ID, which is simply the
identifier. Second, there are the clusters, the
core organizational field. This shows the internal
structure of the issue as output by module two,
and hence in simple terms it says: here are the
major threads or groupings within the issue,
assuming the issue is complex enough to contain
them. Clusters are not summaries or paraphrases.
They’re again groupings of the original
submissions organized by thematic similarity.
And in the formal sketch of the white paper,
each submission cluster inside the cluster’s
collection contains its own fields as well,
including a list of submission IDs, which
means the cluster can be traced back to
the original submission that entered through
module one if needed, as touched upon before.
Third, there are the themes themselves,
which is this high-level list of inferred
topic labels that module two has identified
from the clustering process. And fourth,
there is the metadata, which
describes what module two did
to produce the cluster and theme
issue structure, for transparency.
Now, with this structured input in hand,
module 3 uses it as a routing guide to
gather and organize the contextual data
surrounding the problem or proposal being
put forward. Its job is to build the factual
landscape around the issue. So it pulls in
relevant information from the other Integral
systems: the FRS, the COS, the ITC, the OAD.
In effect, module three says: before we debate a
proposal or debate how to respond to a problem,
let’s make sure we actually understand
the context of the situation in enough
detail to clearly think about it.
That is the underlying reasoning.
And again, I suspect large language models could
really help bridge this considering where we are
with that kind of technology, which can
be localized, scanning complex databases
and returning context-relevant information
in a format that module three consolidates.
And what does it consolidate it all
into? It’s a context-model data object,
which we’re going to talk more about.
Before we move on to module four, there
is a bridge step, as commented on earlier,
between module three and four that generates
candidate scenarios. The bridge step digests
the organized information coming from
modules one through three and produces
a set of candidate scenarios for module four
to evaluate. These proposals are in addition
to what comes from the initial submission in
module one, as talked about before as well.
So it’s adding to the existing proposals.
If someone actually had a problem they
recognized and filled in the field
for their own idea for a solution,
which should be part of the structured form
intake, that would also be a candidate as well.
Now as per the white paper, the bridge step, as
noted, is in the orchestrator in the pseudocode,
but isn’t discussed in the prose. This was
an oversight of the paper. Okay. Understood.
Module three outputs this context model, a
structured object containing information about
the broader reality surrounding the issue:
historical records, system dependencies,
ecological indicators, supporting evidence,
resource and labor profiles, fairness signals,
what have you. The context model becomes
available both in the bridge step,
which uses it in the scenario construction,
and in module four itself, which uses it to check
proposed scenarios against those same conditions.
Module four is where the first true evaluation,
so to speak, actually takes place in the CDS.
Everything else has been kind of developmental,
gathering, organizing, contextualizing, proposing.
And module four is where the system actively
assesses whether a given scenario or proposal
will hold up against ecological, material, labor,
fairness, and constitutional limits once again.
That said, module four processes and outputs a
constraint report, a constraint-report object for
each candidate scenario, recording whether
the proposal passed the relevant checks,
what violations were found, and by nature
of that how modifications would emerge
for it to become viable. So if three
proposals are under consideration,
module four produces three constraint reports,
each individually qualified and described.
Then we arrive at module five, the
participatory deliberation workspace.
Now, everything that has occurred so far, from
initial input into module one up to the output
of the constraint report from module four, has
been part of the system’s preparatory pipeline,
and module five is where the human community
enters the process in a direct and structured way.
To summarize again for clarity, sorry
to be so repetitious, but module one
captures the issue or proposal. Module two
structures it into a coherent issue frame,
whether the input began as a problem report, a
proposal, or some combination of both. Module
three assembles the relevant context around it.
Then there’s this bridge step between module three
and four that generates candidate scenarios,
meaning possible response paths or solution
options that could actually be evaluated. Module
four then filters the scenarios, all of them,
through the system’s ecological, resource,
labor, social, and constitutional constraints.
So by the time the issue reaches module five, the
community is no longer dealing with all sorts of
loose impressions and random information. In other
words, it’s an extremely efficient “secretary.”
Okay. Now, module five and module six.
These go together. What comes out of module
five from human deliberation is what goes
into module six for consensus calculation.
Module five we can think of as a multi-user
deliberation environment, where participants
can interpret the issue and proposals in
question, examine the available scenarios,
review the constraint reports, raise objections,
compare alternatives, compare multiple scenarios,
and contribute ideas, refinements, invent, etc.
This is the reasoning space, a critical one.
And there are tools here, as touched upon
before, such as objection mapping, semantic
discussion threads, scenario comparison
once again, the preference gradients,
pros-and-cons visualization. These are all in the
white paper, and potentially other aids. This is
just the beginning, and I’m sure plenty
of other tools will arise over time.
In the white paper, the outcome of module
five into module six has three core elements:
the active scenarios or proposals under
consideration, the objections attached to
those scenarios, and explicit support signals
which range in a gradient from strong to block.
These three elements allow module six
to literally calculate two things for
each scenario: a consensus score and an
objection index. It then uses those two
results together to determine whether
a scenario should be approved, revised,
or in fact escalated to module nine, or
more human intervention, if you will.
And I’m going to go through each of these
elements in detail in a second. But first,
since we’ve touched upon this prior,
let’s investigate a little bit about
these analytical tools we talked about, as they
are critical tools for analysis in module five.
Let’s start with objection mapping. What
is objection mapping? Objection mapping
is pretty common today, even though sparse,
but in the deliberative decision-making world
it’s relatively common in these systems, in
these software systems. Instead of focusing
on agreement from everyone, it focuses
only on objections in this narrow way.
So a proposal is put forward, and rather than
jumping straight to voting or open debate,
participants are simply asked after
they review it what they object to,
and asked for concrete reasons as to why they
object, why harm would be caused or what have
you. Each objection is then reported and mapped,
usually in a visual cluster, often organized by
theme. The goal is to find patterns that can
inform everybody of the state of disagreement.
So there’s that.
Next is semantic discussion thread
analysis. Polis, once again,
is a platform that attempts this. In
fact, Polis could be, like others,
incorporated into the preliminary development
of CDS module five, as it does share similar
things on the tools level. Similarly,
there’s the AI Objectives Institute,
which also developed this with a tool they call
Talk to the City, which again is worth reviewing.
The rabbit hole is deep when it comes
to the emerging world of deliberative
democracy on the level of analytical tools,
especially once again with the rise of
artificial intelligence and LLMs. But in short,
semantic thread analysis attempts to find order
semantically out of messy discussions
like a series of engagements in a chat.
Now, I still think initial structural inputs
are far more important. I think people have
to approach how they communicate with a very
particular strategy in mind to begin with,
not just flailing in conversation. But
in the principle of this technology,
you just take a transcript of something
and it starts to analyze the state of
agreement or disagreement, giving you a
better sense of the total conversation.
In the end, it’s the combination of these
tools that will have the greatest effect,
and that’s probably more of an art than a science.
So next in the white paper, we have
scenario comparison. This is underspecified,
which is about finding ways to compare
multiple proposals or scenarios against
each other to come to an objective
understanding of which is better.
Now as an aside, module six actually does
a scenario comparison. That’s part of its
process. But there’s a deeper level
that needs to happen in module five
with respect to specific attributes and
characteristics, which I won’t go into.
Let’s move on. Preference gradients. Preference
gradients are a core output of module five, as
noted prior, which carries over as a core input to
module six. There is nothing radical about this.
This is also very common in deliberative democracy
approaches out there. And the white paper suggests
this five-unit gradient I touched upon: strong
support, support, neutral, concern, and block.
Now as far as the module five spec with
respect to these preference gradients,
they exist at the scenario level, one gradient
per participant per scenario. And module six
is designed to evaluate multiple scenarios, as
I said, in parallel and then compare results.
What the spec does not specify is
whether gradients can also apply
to attributes within a scenario.
In principle, someone might want
to apply this kind of gradient to internal
discussion about not the scenario as a whole,
but elements within the scenario. So a
kind of sub-scenario gradient maybe could
be introduced in this effectively recursive
idea in module five to better refine things.
This is just a suggestion. It’s not part of
anything that’s been proposed in the paper.
That said, now there is one other clarification
that’s important in the pipeline that’s described
in the white paper specification for the CDS.
And that has to do with the cyclical nature of
things. The overall pipeline as presented is a
linear flow, from module one through module six,
with module five handling debate and refinement.
And this would work for narrow cases. But it’s
not the only kind of refinement that
happens in real-world deliberation.
Participants may and will likely invent
genuinely new proposals in module five,
ideas that weren’t in the original submission
and aren’t simply modifications of existing
scenarios. In other words, a novel
proposal introduced in module five,
or a radical modification, needs the
same treatment any other scenario gets.
It has to have its context profile
built and its constraints assessed.
And the fix is straightforward. Module
five routes any new scenario back to
modules three and four before admitting
it to the active set in this circular
way. Or this could be thought of more
casually, in fact, where modules three
and four can be seen as simply tools at
the disposal of module five participants,
and they run them in the same kind of access they
run their own analytical tools. So it doesn’t
have to be some kind of formal abrupt thing,
right? I make that as an intuitive comment.
Okay, all that said, let’s return now to
the more bare-bones reality of module five,
and excuse me for jumping around so much here.
To clarify definitively, module five is
a sophisticated variation of a team of
people sitting around a large table covered
with piles of documentation pertaining to a
proposal or a problem that needs resolution.
They are trying to build a textual picture of
the situation, assess relevant data and
limitations, and work toward a solution.
But instead of those loose piles and open-ended
conversations, they’re using structured analytical
tools: objection mapping, scenario comparison,
preference gradients, and they run refined
scenarios back through earlier modules as needed,
as just talked about. So that’s the broad stroke.
Now the actual working method
still needs to be considered,
how we structure the conversation in module
five. It can’t just literally be sort of chaos.
There has to be some kind of general process.
Will it be perfect? Of course not. But that’s
something to be considered as well that is
not included or suggested in the white paper.
Syntegrity, in fact, is that
kind of methodology in form,
in terms of strategy, because that’s exactly
what Syntegrity does if you look into it.
But at some point in this deliberation it
finally reaches a condition where things are
ready to move forward to module six. And three
elements are brought to the surface and ordered,
as they are to be the core ingredients
for the calculation process that happens.
These three are: first, the active
scenarios that have been listed.
These are the ones that have been
signed upon for consideration. Two,
the objections have been mapped and attached
to the scenarios they pertain to. And three,
participants have expressed their support
gradients across the options on the table.
When that three-part state is in place, module
five hands its structured output to module six.
Module six then, in an automated process,
takes over, running its consensus math on
each scenario independently and producing for
each a consensus score, an objection index,
all of this resulting in three potential
outcomes, which is approve, revise,
or escalate, where escalate means to move
to module nine because nothing is working.
Now, let’s explore this in more detail in
module six, again as per the white paper.
Module six takes in those three
core inputs from module five,
along with a potential fourth variable related to
participants themselves, which we’re going to get
to in a moment. To repeat this for clarity, the
gradient votes for each scenario ranging from
strong support to support neutral to concern
to block. These carry numerical values between
1 and -1, as the system quantifies these
relative preferences for the calculation.
Second input, again, is the documented set
of objections, and module six assesses these
to factor into the calculation. In this,
each documented refined objection carries
two parameters: severity and scope. And
each has a float range from zero to one.
Severity measures how serious the objection
is. If an objection relates to significant
perceived harm, it might be 0.9. If
it’s minimally severe, it might be 0.2.
As far as scope, it measures how broadly
the negative outcome would apply.
So an objection affecting a small group or a
section of a co-op might have a scope of 0.1,
while one affecting an entire network
of co-ops might have a scope of 0.8.
Now where do these numbers come from, you
might ask? As far as scope, I think this is
relatively straightforward. Scope pertains to
what’s affected. So if it’s a water supply and
something’s happening with it, we can assess
who relies on the water supply, the geography
of the water supply. So if the scope of an
assumed objection affects 5% of the population,
that’s a relatively small scope. If it
reaches 90%, it has a large or wide scope.
However, severity is harder, as it’s far broader.
Anyone being poisoned by a water supply is bad,
but how bad or severe depends on specifics. If
pollution has a high chance of causing cancer
over time, severity might be 0.9. If it’s mild
and tolerable by normal human exposure standards,
it might be 0.3. So we can understand such a range
intuitively. Formalizing it is more difficult.
Now just so people know, this thinking
isn’t pulled out of thin air. There
are examples of this kind of risk
quantification already in practice.
In fact, the mathematical approach is borrowed
from the broader family of formal risk-assessment
methods, most famously failure mode and
effects analysis, FMEA, which has been
in continuous use since the 1960s in various
industries like aerospace and healthcare.
While the deliberate development of
this, the philosophy if you will,
was inspired by sociocracy, which has
been in continuous use since the 1970s,
and treats objections as information to be
resolved rather than votes to be counted.
Okay, input number three is this participant
weight. The third input is participant weight,
which has not been covered. This is
controversial and in most cases would
not be utilized at all. It refers to
the idea that each person in a CDS node
carries a degree of influence based on prior
performance, credentials, or proven expertise.
I was never going to put something like this
into the system until I started thinking about
extreme edge cases, situations where the issue
under deliberation is so technically demanding
that it requires specialized proven skill to
evaluate responsibly and come up with a solution.
The obvious danger of this kind of
weighting is the rise of elitism,
which cuts against the core principles Integral
is designed explicitly to uphold. But we also
have to be realistic in the same way that I’m
not going to stop someone on the street and
ask them to prescribe medication for me
or perform some kind of surgery. I will
have to trust a doctor with a certain
amount of background in that field.
There are domains, in other words, where expertise
genuinely matters. I should have specified the
conditionality of participant weights more
carefully in the white paper, but again,
this is all about broad strokes meant to get
the ideas out there and get others thinking.
So the edge case is simple. There might
be something that happens in the CDS
where complexity forces reliance
on a minority opinion who have
again historically demonstrated
the capacity to engage with it.
On to input four, threshold parameters.
The fourth input is a pair of thresholds
that help determine the final
directive. Consensus threshold,
which is the minimum consensus score required
for approval. This spec generalizes this at
0.72. You could crudely interpret that
as 72%, but again, it’s not a percentage,
even though it’s pointing in the same direction.
It’s a point on the weighted gradient scale.
Then there’s the block threshold, the maximum
objection index permitted before a blocking
condition is triggered. The spec generalizes
this at 0.30, and these two parameters are
built into the predefined rule structure
of the CDS, meaning the node has made this
constitutional decision in advance. The
parameters have been decided in advance.
And one of the great advantages of
having multiple nodes come online
eventually is that these thresholds
refine themselves based on experience,
part of the collective consciousness of
the entire network. If one node is having
a strong success with a particular set of values,
other nodes will see that and pick up on them.
Putting it all together now, the consensus
score. Here is how all of this comes together
in the current state of the white paper.
The calculation runs from the four inputs.
The first step is producing a consensus score
from the gradient votes combined with participant
weights. If there are any, for our purposes
we’ll assume everyone’s weight is one or equal.
Now you’ll notice from an image I have
on screen, in the current gradient scale,
there isn’t a symmetry in how numerical values
are assigned to positions of support. This
is intentional. The gap between concern
and block is larger than the gap between
support and strong support. Hence, blocking
carries disproportionate negative weight.
This means that a small number of people blocking
will drag the score down harder than an equivalent
number of people strongly supporting will pull
it up. It forces critical attention to be paid to
the reasons someone wants to block or strongly
disapprove of a proposal rather than letting
enthusiasm drown out principled resistance because
everyone else generally agrees in the majority.
And what you have is the following calculation
for a consensus score, which is fairly basic.
Multiply each person’s preference number
by their weight, add all of those up,
then divide by the total of all the weights.
And this gives you the overall direction and
intensity of the group’s preferences.
A score of 1 means everybody strongly
supports. A score of -1 means everybody blocks.
A score of 0 means the group is perfectly split.
And next is the objection index. Now with the
consensus score in hand, module six now turns
to the second half of the calculation. While the
consensus score measures the overall direction
and intensity of support, the objection index
measures whether any principled objection is
serious enough to warrant halting or revising a
proposal, regardless of how much support it has.
A key asymmetry of the system process. A proposal
can be wildly popular and still be blocked if even
one well-grounded objection crosses the
severity and scope threshold. And again,
this is what prevents the CDS from
moving into a kind of numbers game
where the enthusiastic majority overrides
small groups raising a serious concern.
The formula for the objection index is
extremely simple. For each documented objection,
multiply its severity by its scope, and then
take the maximum value across all objections.
And it’s a critical qualifying concern because
it’s a safeguard against something really bad
being decided upon without thoroughly vetting
everything that is on the table. So again,
the objection index is what ensures that
the most serious concern gets evaluated.
Now we are ready for the three possible outcomes
of module six. So it now has these numbers,
a consensus score and an objection index.
It compares them against the two thresholds
from the rule structure: consensus threshold,
the spec default is 0.72, and block threshold,
the spec default is 0.3. From this comparison,
one of three directives is produced per scenario.
Outcome one is approve. If the
consensus score meets or exceeds
the consensus threshold and the objection
index stays below the blocking threshold,
the scenario is approved. In plain terms,
enough people support it and no single
objection is serious enough to block it.
In that case, all things being equal,
the single scenario moves into module seven
for recording as a decision and then into
module eight for dispatch where it becomes
coordinated action across the other systems.
Now the second possible outcome is revise. If
the consensus score falls below the threshold
or the objection index crosses over the
blocking line, the scenario is returned
to module five for needed revision. Either
way, module six returns a directive to revise,
along with required conditions that point to
the meta-information I just described. What
needs to improve? The scenario goes back
to module five for further deliberation.
And hence, you may observe we have another
cyclical aspect of the CDS. Revision is not
failure. It’s a normal part of the flow. If
revision produces a genuinely new proposal,
rather than a mechanical modification,
it should route back through modules
three and four as tools, as stated
before, returning to deliberation.
And finally we have outcome three, escalate
to module nine. There are two conditions where
things escalate to module nine. And once again
it’s a little bit murky in the white paper.
First is when the cyclical revision process
continues to fail, meaning you’re constantly
revising but it’s not improving in terms
of consensus. It’s just cycling between
five and six and five and six. In the
white paper addendum section of the CDS,
this is referenced with a persistent duration of
disagreement across cycles as a variable. However,
this is not expressed in the white paper
in an expansive way that it is in the code.
And I think what you could simply do is come up
with a number that says, well, if this happens
so many times, an alert will say it might
be time to go to module nine’s Syntegrity.
Now the second trigger occurs in a far more subtle
and subjective way, meaning even though it could
probably overlap with the first as part of the
objection that moves things to module nine and
Syntegrity, this is a case where it’s not
rejected. The consensus is sufficient and
there’s no single blocking objection large enough
to block it. But there is still a pronounced,
outright-stated unresolved value conflict
underneath the numbers that is apparent.
I consider this an edge case once again, but
as I started brainstorming this, it’s like:
what are all the possible things I can
think of that can reduce the efficacy or
do something wrong in this scenario in terms of
the philosophy behind it? I sketched all this out.
You should see my notebooks on all of this stuff.
And what it is, is a more subtle trigger that
has to do with values, referred to in the white
paper as unresolved value conflict. Let’s imagine
we have a community and a very tiny percentage
actually have a deep sentimental relationship to
something like an artifact, a building, something
historical that means something very specific
to a particular group of people or individual.
The ramifications of that value-oriented
relationship have to be accounted for in
civil society. It’s a moral issue. If
something is extremely severe where you
have to do something like tear down a sentimental
physical structure because it’s really necessary,
that logic can play forward and will probably
influence those that are emotionally tied to it.
But as we see in the world today, some huge
corporation decides it wants to build something
somewhere, and they’re willing to buy out or rip
down something of great historical value. We see
this in Native American cultures. So much Native
American land and resources and infrastructure
has been disturbed by corporate industry
just going in and doing whatever they want.
I’m not big on sentimentality personally, at
least not in the sense of physical things,
but I can understand why others are. So that is
the second trigger, and how that actually comes to
be in terms of the trigger process would probably
be far more casual than any kind of calculation.
What could happen in the constitutional rules of
the node is a thoughtful provision is put in that
says, well, if the module six outcome is achieved
through all parameters normally approving,
but there is still an objection that
comes from this value orientation,
some kind of appeal can be set forward,
and that brings in a new sensitivity to it.
This is an edge case, but I think it has to
be accounted for. If you don’t do these kinds
of things, the ramifications can be
technically disturbing. If someone in
a node feels like they didn’t have their values
respected, it again is complicated as it all is,
and they don’t feel respected because of what
happened, they might behave in adversarial ways.
In the same way we see all across the
world today this sort of emotional
disrespect that people show toward each
other amplified like crazy, of course,
in the current market economy. And what
do you have? I remember reading about a
guy just recently that burned down his entire
employer’s building, and he said that comment,
I’m sure some of you have seen it, that “all
they had to do was pay me a living wage.”
We generate so much toxicity by the
fundamental myopic, competitive,
and self-oriented disposition of so many people,
and we are disregarding so many people in so many
complex ways. And the repercussions of that,
even though they’re sparse and I’m not saying
they’re appropriate, can be disturbance,
violence, and terrorism effectively.
And that edge case brings it into
module nine, where a different process,
perhaps including this Syntegrity, is moved
forward to try and come to terms with the
conflict. So those are the two things
that could escalate it to module nine.
Now to wrap this up, assuming that moves
forward, we end up in module seven,
which doesn’t take much explanation. It’s the
documentation, stamping, metadata. It says,
okay, this is on record. This is what we decided.
What the actions are then moves to module eight,
which dispatches the directives to get
the decision going in the real world.
Now, one more thing before I forget, because
trying to be as detailed as I can without
being overwhelming, there are a few more
clarifications for module six. Module six
is likely going to have multiple scenarios
to evaluate, right? And when it finishes
running all of them from module five, it will
produce a list of consensus result objects,
one per scenario, each with its own consensus
score, objection index, and directive.
The orchestrator, meaning the coordinating
layer that governs the flow between the modules,
is what selects among them by comparison.
If one or more scenarios return approved,
the strongest, highest-consensus,
lowest-objection-index scenario moves
forward to module seven. It wins, so to
speak, and hence to module eight for dispatch.
If none are approved and one or more are
flagged indeed to escalate to module nine,
the highest-consensus escalation routes
into module nine for the human deliberation.
And if every scenario returns as revise,
the whole set goes back to module five with
the consensus results as the new information to
consider in deliberation, and the cycle begins.
So just to be clear, as it currently stands,
and this is just a conceptual architecture
on a certain level, even though I’m trying my
best to make things technically coherent and
have a sense of how this can actually work,
module six is running the calculations, but
the orchestrator is what makes the comparative
determination across all scenarios after
module six is done. I hope that makes sense.
Just like the introduction of automated
proposals between modules three and four,
this step is done for the sake of consistency.
So each of the properties are separated for the
modules in terms of what they actually do. They
don’t have to be that way. You could combine
different multi-step properties in each module,
but again, this is for conceptual purposes only.
And of course, it is entirely possible for
multiple scenarios to come out of module six
and hit the approval condition at once
simultaneously. And when that happens,
the orchestrator sorting step is what
breaks the tie. The scenario with the
best combination of high consensus
and low objection index wins.
So I’m about to keel over from all of this
tedium. This is not a typical content array
for a podcast. So we’ve already
mentioned modules seven and eight,
so I think that’s good enough for now. We
could talk about the technical breakdown
of dispatching the decision or the documentation
and meta information on how decision is stored,
which of course is important because
if it goes to module 10 later on,
meaning there’s a review process, all of
that data needs to be sound and reviewable.
Now one thing I want to just
finally get to and reiterate
in the spirit of all this, which I just
alluded to, but I want to say it again:
the structure put forward here is organized
primarily by function. Each module represents
a distinct cognitive role in the decision process.
But the way those functions are combined and
implemented doesn’t have to look anything
like the pseudocode sketches in the paper.
Things have changed a great deal in
the last couple of years. In fact,
they’re just changing daily, it seems.
When it comes to data processing and this
kind of move away from chains of narrow
purpose-built algorithms toward this more
complex AI-driven model ecosystem,
large language models once again.
In many ways, LLMs are likely the
secret sauce that makes something
like the CDS far more feasible
than it would be many years ago.
We now have the ability to run locally
hosted models without depending on
cloud data centers that are burning up the
atmosphere and sucking up a bunch of water.
And you localize these systems, you feed the
constitutional constraints and policy documents
directly into a novel model, you build the
retrieval processes through these models,
such as with module three, bridging
other systems that have unique parallel
systems of engaging or some kind of
fluidity once again in the structure,
and you can begin to see how this can take
shape in a far less difficult way than
what is proposed in the white paper because
it’s more of a traditional type of approach.
Moreover, the value processes can
be far more subtle when you get to
nuanced reasoning about things like values,
subtle context elements, scope and severity,
imperative trade-offs, which was really
way out of reach again a long time ago.
So on the logical basis and general reasoning
behind the structure I’ve just explained holds up
in my view, the way it actually gets implemented
and expanded is likely to look quite different.
Okay folks, that does it for me today. I’ll be
back next time, which I promise will happen sooner
than later, for the OAD, the Open Access Design
system, which actually will be a lot easier to
talk about, much easier to talk about than this,
as it’s far less abstract than digital democracy.
So we’ll take it up then. This program
is brought to you by my Patreon,
and I will be sending out an email fairly
soon to everyone that signed up for the
Integral mailing list. I’ve got a lot
of applications to go through. Really
appreciate those that have done that
again, and I will generally be in touch.
Everyone take care out
there. I’ll talk to you soon.